Now that you have been introduced to the theory and implementation of mutual information, it's good
to see it used with real life activation data.
It turns out that mutual information is quite versatile and can be used in several different ways by
organizing the data in different ways, and that will give different results and reveal different insights
into model functioning.
So in this video, I will show you one way of calculating mutual information across lots of tokens for
each pair of hidden states dimensions.
And then in the next video, you will implement mutual information across the hidden states dimensions
for each pair of tokens.
So it's a bit of a different strategy.
You will also see in this video that scikit learn's learns.
Implementation can be slow, prohibitively so for large data sets.
Now, this is a nuanced discussion that we will continue into the next video.
But the upshot is that although scikit learn's algorithm is more accurate, it doesn't really matter
that much for comparing mutual information between different layers or token categories.
Anyway, let me explain what we will do in the Python demo and then I'll switch to code.
So to start with I will import GPT two and run some text through it.
It's just a little sequence of text about Turkish coffee that I copied from Wikipedia.
Then I will calculate mutual information across all the tokens for one pair of hidden state dimensions
in one layer, and that you see visualized here.
So the x and the y axes show two dimensions in one of the transformer blocks.
Now remember that these are not the individual attention or MLP neurons.
Instead, these are the final outputs of the transformer block and it has the same dimensionality as
the token embeddings dimensionality.
So in this scatter plot each dot is a token in the text.
And I think there's like 94 tokens in total.
So you can see that this cloud of dots is fairly isotropic.
It doesn't really seem to be any clear linear or nonlinear relationship between the two variables,
certainly not based on just initial visual inspection.
And indeed, the mutual information between these two variables is zero.
Okay.
So that is for one pair of dimensions.
But of course there are 768 dimensions, which is a lot of possible pairs.
So the next part of the code demo I will run this same analysis, but over all of the possible pairs
within one transformer block.
So here you see a histogram of what those mutual information values look like.
And you can see that over all of the pairs we do get some very small values.
But there's most of the values are clustered around one or maybe a little bit greater than one.
So here you see the histogram.
We can visualize all of these results in this matrix over here where the color corresponds to the strength
of the mutual information between the corresponding pairs of dimensions.
Now it looks like there's only around 370 ish dimensions.
But that's because in the analysis code, I have skipped every other dimension.
And I did that because this analysis takes a really long time to run.
And when I use the scikit learn implementation, it takes a really, really long time to learn so long
that it's not feasible even for this tiny little toy example.
So I'll have more to say about that when I switch to code and continue the discussion into the next
video.
But anyway, this distribution is just for one layer.
So then I will repeat this analysis that you see here for all of the hidden state layers.
So that is the initial embeddings layer and all of the transformer blocks.
And you can see those distributions here.
Now they're almost entirely all overlapping except for the embeddings dimension or the embeddings layer
here.
So at least visually, doesn't really seem like mutual information is shifting on average as a function
of depth into the model.
Now in this video, in the code demo, I'll switch to in a moment.
I calculated mutual information across all of the tokens within each pair of dimensions.
As I mentioned in the beginning of this video, that's not the only way to calculate mutual information.
And in fact, it's probably not the best way unless you're running an analysis like for different categories
of tokens or token sequences.
For example on different semantic topics, or maybe in different languages, you're going to see very
different results from this.
In the next video, when I apply the analysis in a slightly different way.
Anyway, let's now switch to code and have a look.
Here are the libraries that we will use in this video, and also this function which you have seen in
the previous video.
Here I'm importing GPT two small and its tokenizer and switching it to eval mode, which we will basically
always do for the rest of the course.
Okay, here is some text.
Turkish coffee is very finely ground coffee.
ET cetera, et cetera.
There are a bit under 100 tokens in this text, and it's just one paragraph that I copied from Wikipedia.
If you have never experienced the pleasure of drinking Turkish coffee, then I can recommend it.
If you can find a real Turkish coffee shop.
Okay, let's see.
There are in fact 94 tokens and actually there is an error in here.
This should say two list.
This needs to be a list okay.
There are 64 unique tokens.
And why are there fewer unique tokens than there are total tokens.
Because for example, the word coffee appears multiple times.
In fact, I believe the word coffee appears seven times in this text.
That is not relevant for this video.
That is something we will investigate in the code challenge in the next video.
So more on that anyway.
Yeah, a bit under 100 tokens.
Okay.
Now I'm just pushing all of this text through the model.
You can see I am running this on the CPU.
I'm not using the GPU here because it's just a little bit of text.
And this is the only time that I'm actually calling the model.
So it's really not worth all the additional overhead for running the GPU here.
So yeah, here I'm just confirming the size of the hidden layers for one particular layer, the hidden
states.
So we have one for one batch, one sequence 94 tokens.
And of course 768 is the embeddings dimensionality of GPT two small.
Here I'm creating a function.
You will see this function we will use in the next several videos, all the code challenges in the next
several videos.
And there's no new code here compared to what you have seen in the previous video.
All I'm doing is gathering up all of that information and putting it into a function so I can input
the variables x and y and calculate the mutual information between them.
Now this code here is a manual implementation of mutual information.
It's a direct translation of the formulas from the previous video into code.
This is not using uh, the method from scikit learn.
We'll get back to that later okay.
So I'll run that function.
And here is just an example of one pair of dimensions across all the tokens.
Okay, so I'm just picking hidden layer three.
Just arbitrarily.
You can change this if you like.
And now I am going to calculate mutual information between these two dimensions again arbitrarily chosen.
These can be any two numbers between 0 and 767.
And now all of the data points for x and y are the 94 different tokens.
So here I extract the data create a 2D histogram.
And here I'm calculating mutual information.
Actually in this case I'm using scikit learn's method because we know that this is more accurate compared
to this code up here.
Okay.
So why do we ever want to use this code?
I will get back to that in a few moments.
Okay.
And then the rest of this visualization here is just creating the demo.
The figure that you saw in the slides a moment ago.
Okay, so now I'm going to run some code that takes way too long.
Okay, so here I am looping over all of the hidden layers.
And then I'm looping over all of the dimensions.
And you can see I'm skipping actually the dimensions by two.
And then I'm calculating mutual information using the scikit learn function.
Okay.
Now it turns out this is just going to take an absurdly long amount of time.
I'm actually going to let it run for like a minute.
And then I'll come back and we'll see how far it got.
In approximately one minute.
Okay.
So I just crashed this and basically it took uh, so after a minute it only got through 38 dimensions
in the first layer.
That means we I don't know, this would take hours or something like that.
So therefore what I'm going to do is calculate pairwise mutual information using the function that I
wrote.
This is the direct implementation of the formula that I showed a moment ago.
Now this takes around six minutes, which is still difficult to scale up to a really large data set
and a larger model, more text, longer, more tokens in the text.
But six minutes is certainly a lot better than the like six hours that it would take to run this analysis.
Okay, so I am going to pause the recording and let this run for another 5.5 minutes or so.
So actually that only took around four minutes.
Not sure why that's faster than the six minutes that it took when I first wrote this code, but maybe
it's connected to a better server computer anyway, it doesn't matter.
Okay, so we got through all 13 layers.
Remember that the first hidden states is the embeddings.
And then we get the 12 transformer blocks.
Okay.
So now I'm going to create a histogram of all of the mutual information values and show the actual pairwise
mutual information values in this matrix over here.
Now remember that all of these values are zero because mutual information is a symmetric measure.
So the mutual information between x and Y is the same as the mutual information between y and x.
So therefore if I would loop over redundantly, if you know if this loop went like this starting at
zero, then we would get a full matrix.
But that would be completely redundant.
Then it would take twice as long to calculate exactly the same values twice.
So therefore this second loop I start from dim I plus one.
Now if you actually want to have a full matrix, it's completely fine.
What you can do is take this matrix and add to it its transpose.
So that would just flip this lower triangle onto the upper triangle and you would get a full matrix.
That's fine if you want to use that for some reason.
But just keep in mind that all of the values here are perfectly mirrored for the values down here.
Okay.
Anyway, uh, yeah.
And as I mentioned, let's see, you can see here I'm skipping by two.
And that's just to increase the, uh, calculation or decrease the calculation time.
Okay.
Now what I am going to demonstrate in, I think in, in two videos for now.
Or maybe it's the next video.
Anyway, very soon in the future, what I will demonstrate is that the manual calculation of mutual
information has a bias in it for, uh, that just shifts the entire distribution up.
And that bias is basically due to, uh, undersampling the probability space because we have a lot of
zeros in here.
So what happens is that actually I can even show it in this example here.
So the function that I wrote is called mutual Information Manual.
So all I'm going to do now is change the scikit learn function into my manual function.
And now we see that the uh wait let me get rid of this.
And now we see that the mutual information is around one.
So there is a constant shift increase in the mutual information.
Let me set that back here.
So that means that these values are the relative values are all accurate.
So mutual information relatively calculated between different pairs.
But there's a global shift.
The entire distribution gets shifted to the right because of the uh yeah.
Just some numerical issues with the direct implementation of mutual information.
But all the relative values are the same.
Again, that's something I'm going to discuss in more detail and demonstrate in a couple of videos from
now.
Okay, so what I do here is just extract all of the mutual information values, all the unique non-zero
mutual information values from each layer, each of these hidden layers.
And then I'm making a histogram of those and plotting those.
Uh, oops.
Okay, so I did not initially plan when I created this video, and I planned out this video.
I did not plan to rerun this code from the beginning.
Uh, so I actually overwrote this variable here, uh, which is why, um, yeah, that's why, uh,
this is now crashing because mi is just one variable, whereas it's supposed to be a full tensor full
of data.
Anyway, all of this code just recreates this figure here.
So I'm not going to spend 6 minutes or 4 minutes rerunning the code to generate all the data.
The point here is that you see, for this particular analysis, the way I set up this analysis, the
mutual information doesn't really shift as we go deeper into the model.
And that is something that you can compare with the results from the next video, where we are going
to set up the mutual information analysis in a slightly different way and get quite different results.
Anyway, here are three take home points from this video.
One is that mutual information is a fairly versatile technique.
It can be used and adapted in several different ways, which you will see over the course of the next
few videos.
In general, it's better to interpret relative values of mutual information and not the absolute number.
And that's for reasons that you have seen here, and we'll continue to see over the next few videos.
Basically, that just has to do with the sensitivity of the mutual information analysis to parameters
such as the number of bins in the histogram, and also possible numerical issues that can arise from
undersampling the probability space.
And finally, in this case, in this video, we calculated mutual information over all of the tokens
for each pair of dimensions.
That is not always necessarily going to be the most insightful application.
In fact, calculating mutual information across the hidden state activations for each pair of tokens,
and that is often going to be more interpretable and also more computationally feasible.
And that is exactly what you are going to implement in the code challenge coming up after first learning
about the relationship between mutual information and covariance.